/*
Purpose: Welcome to this section of my portfolio! Here, you will find a curated collection of Excel interview questions
that I have thoughtfully answered. 
Each solution is accompanied by detailed comments and explanations to ensure clarity and to demonstrate my thought
process.

The goal of this repository is not only to showcase my proficiency in Excel but also to serve as a resource for others 
preparing for interviews or
looking to strengthen their understanding of Excel concepts.
The questions cover a range of topics, from foundational queries to more advanced techniques, highlighting practical 
applications
and best practices in database management and analysis.

Feel free to explore, learn, and reach out if you have any questions or would like to discuss these examples further.
Let's grow together in mastering the art of data querying!
here you will find some Intermediate Excel interview questions that I answered with comments to explain
Author: Kirolos Girgis
*/

- Explain the use of COUNTIF and COUNTIFS?

The COUNTIF couunts cells that meet a single condition, while COUNTIFS counts cells that meet multiple critieria

- How do you remove duplicates in a dataset?

Select the data then go to the data tab then click on remove duplicates then select the columns you want to remove duplicates from. then click ok

- What is the purpose of a Pivot Table? How would you summarize sales data by region and salesperson?

Pivot Tables allow you to summarize, group, and analyze large datasets.
Select data → Insert Pivot Table.
Drag "Region" to Rows and "Salesperson" to Rows.
Drag "Sales" to Values.

- How do you use conditional formatting to highlight cells greater than the average?

Select the range → Go to Home > Conditional Formatting > New Rule.
Choose "Format cells that contain" → Select "Greater Than" → Enter =AVERAGE(range).

- What formula removes extra spaces from a cell?

=TRIM(A1)

- How do you create a dynamic chart that updates automatically?

Use excel tables as the data source, tabled expand automatically when new data is added.

- What is the purpose of Excel Tables?

Tables simplify data management by enabling structured referencing, dynamic ranges , and filtering.

- You are given a dataset with missing or incorrect values. What steps would you take to clean the data?

1- Remove Blank Rows or Columns: Use filters to identify blank rows.
Go to Home > Find & Select > Go to Special > Blanks, then delete them.
2- Identify Missing Values: Use Conditional Formatting to highlight blanks:
Go to Home > Conditional Formatting > New Rule > Format only cells that contain > Blanks.
Replace missing values using formulas like =IF(A1="", "N/A", A1) or fill them manually.
3- Handle Missing Data:Use techniques like: Replacing blanks with 0: =IF(A1="", 0, A1)
Filling with column averages: =IF(A1="", AVERAGE(range), A1)
Carrying forward previous values using Power Query or Fill Handle.
4- Correct Incorrect Values: Use Data Validation to flag values outside acceptable ranges. Use Find and Replace for common errors (e.g., misspellings).
5- Trim Extra Spaces: Use the TRIM function to remove extra spaces: =TRIM(A1).
6- Convert Data Types: Ensure consistent formats for dates, numbers, and text. Use the Text to Columns tool to split and correct values.
7- Remove Duplicates: Go to Data > Remove Duplicates to clean redundant entries.
8- Validate the Data: Use Conditional Formatting or pivot tables to check for inconsistencies.

- at steps would you take to prepare Excel Data for import into another program for example SQL?

To prepare Excel data for SQL or other programs:

1- Clean the Data: Remove blanks, errors, and duplicates.
2- Standardize formats (e.g., dates as YYYY-MM-DD).
3- Ensure Consistent Data Types: Verify each column has a consistent data type (e.g., text, numbers, dates).
4- Remove Special Characters: Use CLEAN or SUBSTITUTE to remove non-printable or special characters.
5- Remove Unnecessary Formatting: Avoid merged cells, conditional formatting, and unnecessary styles.
6- Normalize Data: Split concatenated data into separate columns. Use Text to Columns for splitting.
7- Add Unique Identifiers: Include a primary key column to ensure each record is unique.
8- Export in a Compatible Format: Save the file as a .CSV or .TXT format for SQL import:
9- Verify the delimiter (commas, tabs, etc.) matches SQL requirements.
10- Check for Null Values: Replace blanks with NULL or an appropriate value.
11- Validate the Data: Use Excel’s Data Validation to ensure data consistency.
12- Test Import: Import a small sample into SQL to ensure data integrity before importing the full dataset.
